Mr. Speaker. Thank you. You can smile, it’s OK. Thank you, thank you, thank you. Thank you. Please.

Mr. Speaker. Madam Vice President. Our first lady and second gentleman. Good to see you guys up there. Members of Congress.

And by the way, Chief Justice, I may need a court order. She gets to go to the game tomorrow, next week; I have to stay home. We got to work something out here.

Members of the cabinet. Leaders of our military. Chief Justice, associate justices and retired justices of the Supreme Court. And to you, my fellow Americans.

You know, I start tonight by congratulating the 118th Congress and the new speaker of the House, Kevin McCarthy.

Speaker, I don’t want to ruin your reputation, but I look forward to working with you.

And I want to congratulate the new leader of the House Democrats, the first African American minority leader in history, Hakeem Jeffries. He won in spite of the fact I campaigned for him.

Congratulations to the longest-serving leader in the history of the United States Senate, Mitch McConnell. Where are you, Mitch?

And congratulations to Chuck Schumer, another — you know, another term as Senate minority leader. You know, I think you — only this time you have a slightly bigger majority, Mr. Leader. You’re the majority leader. About that much bigger?

Well, I tell you what, I want to give special recognition to someone who I think is going to be considered the greatest speaker in the history of the House of Representatives, Nancy Pelosi.

Editors’ Picks

A New ‘M*A*S*H’ Scene: Written by ChatGPT, Read by Hawkeye and B.J.

Time Has Been Codified and Commodified. Jenny Odell Wants to Set It Free.

The Moon May Get Its Own Time Zone
Continue reading the main story
Folks, the story of America is a story of progress and resilience. Of always moving forward. Of never, ever giving up.

It’s a story unique among all nations.

We’re the only country that has emerged from every crisis we’ve ever entered stronger than we got into it.

Look, folks, that’s what we’re doing again.

Two years ago, the economy was reeling.

I stand here tonight after we have created, with the help of many people in this room, 12 million new jobs — more jobs created in two years than any president has created in four years, because of you all, because of the American people.

Two years ago — and two years ago, Covid had shut down, our businesses were closed, our schools were robbed of so much.

And today, Covid no longer controls our lives.

And two years ago, democracy faced its greatest threat since the Civil War.

And today, though bruised, our democracy remains unbowed and unbroken.

As we gather here tonight, we’re writing the next chapter in the great American story, a story of progress and resilience. When world leaders ask me to define America, and they do, believe it or not, I say I can define it in one word, and I mean this: possibilities. We don’t think anything is beyond our capacity. Everything is a possibility.

You know, we’re often told that Democrats and Republicans can’t work together.

But over the past two years, we proved the cynics and naysayers wrong.

Yes, we disagreed plenty. And yes, there were times when Democrats went alone.

But time and again, Democrats and Republicans came together.

Came together to defend a stronger and safer Europe.

You came together to pass once-in-a-generation infrastructure law, building bridges connecting our nation and our people.

We came together to pass the most significant law ever helping victims exposed to toxic burn pits.

And in fact — it was important — and in fact, I signed over 300 bipartisan pieces of legislation since becoming president. From reauthorizing the Violence Against Women Act, the Electoral Count Reform Act, the Respect for Marriage Act that protects the right to marry the person you love.

And to my Republican friends, if we could work together in the last Congress, there’s no reason we can’t work together and find consensus on important things in this Congress as well.

Folks, you all are as informed as I am, but I think the people sent us a clear message. Fighting for the sake of fighting, power for the sake of power, conflict for the sake of conflict, gets us nowhere.

That’s always been my vision of our country, and I know it’s many of yours.

To restore the soul of this nation.

To rebuild the backbone of America, America’s middle class.

And to unite the country.

We’ve been sent here to finish the job, in my view.

For decades, the middle class has been hollowed out, and more than — and no one administration, but for a long time.

Too many good-paying manufacturing jobs moved overseas. Factories closed down.

Once-thriving cities and towns that many of you represent became shadows of what they used to be.

And along the way, something else we lost.

Pride. Our sense of self-worth.

I ran for president to fundamentally change things, to make sure our economy works for everyone so we can all feel that pride in what we do.

To build an economy from the bottom up and the middle out, not from the top down. Because when the middle class does well, the poor have a ladder up and the wealthy still do very well. We all do well.

I know a lot of you always kid me for always quoting my dad, but my dad used to say, “Joey, a job is about a lot more than a paycheck.” He really would say this. It’s about a lot more than a paycheck. It’s about your dignity. It’s about respect. It’s about being able to look your kid in the eye and say, “Honey, it’s going to be OK,” and mean it.

Well, folks, so let’s look at the results. We’re not finished yet by any stretch of the imagination. But unemployment rate is at 3.4 percent, a 50-year low. Near record — near record unemployment. Near record unemployment for Black and Hispanic workers.

We’ve already created, with your help, 800,000 good-paying manufacturing jobs, the fastest growth in 40 years.

And where is it written — where is it written that America can’t lead the world in manufacturing? And I don’t know where that’s written.

For too many decades, we imported projects and exported jobs.

Now, thanks to what you’ve all done, we’re exporting American products and creating American jobs.

Folks, inflation — inflation has been a global problem because the pandemic disrupted our supply chains and Putin’s unfair and brutal war in Ukraine disrupted energy supplies as well as food supplies, blocking all that grain in Ukraine.

But we’re better positioned than any country on earth right now.

But we have more to do. But here at home, inflation is coming down.

Here at home, gas prices are down $1.50 from their peak.

Food inflation is coming down, not fast enough but coming down.

Inflation has fallen every month for the last six months while take-home pay has gone up.

Additionally, over the last two years, a record 10 million Americans applied to start new businesses. Ten million.

And by the way, every time — every time someone starts a small business, it’s an act of hope.

And Madam Vice President, I want to thank you for leading that effort to ensure that small businesses have access to capital and the historic laws we enacted that are going to just come into being.

Standing here last year, I shared with you a story of American genius and possibilities.

Semiconductors, small computer chips the size of a fingerprint that power everything from cellphones to automobiles and so much more. These chips were invented in America. Let’s get that straight. They were invented in America.

And we used to make 40 percent of the world’s chips.

In the last several decades, we lost our edge. We’re down to only producing 10 percent. We all saw what happened during the pandemic when chip factories shut down overseas.

Today’s automobiles need 3,000 chips, each of those automobiles. But American automobiles couldn’t make enough cars because there weren’t enough chips.

Car prices went up. People got laid off. So did everything from refrigerators to cellphones.

We can never let that happen again.

That’s why — that’s why we came together to pass the bipartisan CHIPS and Science Act.

Folks, I know I’ve been criticized for saying this, but I’m not changing my view. We’re going to make sure the supply chain for America begins in America. The supply chain begins in America.

We’ve already created — we’ve already created 800,000 new manufacturing jobs without this law, before the law kicks in.

With this new law, we’re going to create hundreds of thousands of new jobs across the country. And I mean all across the country. Throughout not just the coast, but through the middle of the country as well.

That’s going to come from companies that have announced more than $300 billion in investment in American manufacturing over the next few years.

Outside of Columbus, Ohio, Intel is building semiconductor factories on a thousand acres — literally a field of dreams.

It’s going to create 10,000 jobs, that one investment. Seven thousand construction jobs. Three thousand jobs in those factories once they’re finished — they call them factories.

Jobs paying an average of $130,000 a year, and many do not require a college degree.

And jobs — because we worked together, these jobs where people don’t have to leave home to search for opportunity.

And it’s just getting started.

Think about the new homes, the small businesses, the big, the medium-size businesses — so much more that’s going to be needed to support those 3,000 — those 3,000 permanent jobs in the factories that are going to be built.

Talk to mayors and governors, Democrats and Republicans, and they’ll tell you what this means for their communities.

We’re seeing these field of dreams transform the heartland.

But to maintain the strongest economy in the world, we need the best infrastructure in the world.

And folks, as you all know, we used to be No. 1 in the world in infrastructure. We’ve sunk to 13th in the world. The United States of America — 13th in the world in infrastructure, modern infrastructure.

But now we’re coming back because we came together and passed the bipartisan infrastructure law, the largest investment in infrastructure since President Eisenhower’s Interstate Highway System.

And folks, already, we’ve funded over 20,000 projects, including major airports from Boston to Atlanta to Portland.

Projects that are going to put thousands of people to work rebuilding our highways, our bridges, our railroads, our tunnels, ports, airports, clean water, high-speed internet all across America. Urban, rural, tribal.

And folks, we’re just getting started. We’re just getting started. And I mean it sincerely. I want to thank my Republican friends who voted for the law.

And my Republican friends who voted against it as well. But I’m still — I still get asked to fund the projects in those districts as well, but don’t worry.